# vocatus
Vocatus is a digital advocate for patient data rights that makes it easier to request medical records, capture whether that request was successful, and provide a feedback loop to the people who should care at healthcare institutions, in the media, and federal agencies like the [Office of Civil Liberties] (http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/office/). 

BLUF: Its a challenge for individual patients and their families to serve as advocates at the healthcare system level, but their voice is crucial to driving user centered health and human services. In particular there is a groundswell of patient advocacy around access to personal health data, especially in digital formats. There are mounting stories of patients coming to harm when they cannot easily access this data, and a [proposed weakening] (https://www.federalregister.gov/articles/2015/04/15/2015-08514/medicare-and-medicaid-programs-electronic-health-record-incentive-program-modifications-to#p-219) of patient data access requirements in the Meaningful Use federal incentive program for electronic health records. Our hypothesis is that by bringing high volume, data-driven public and federal agency attention to this issue we can convince healthcare delivery system leaders and their legal teams to make this problem a priority. 

Our initial goal is to make it easy for patients to submit a standard legal request for their medical records, and then capture whether their healthcare provider appropriately complies with that request under HIPAA through a two-pronged follow up strategy. By collecting this information we can all learn more about the institutions where patient data access is working and where it is not, bring data driven public attention to this issue through the media, and amplify patient voices by joining them together when they report serious violations of their rights to the Office of Civil Liberties. 

Our Proposed MVP:
1. Outreach to patients and families activated around access to medical records, especially those at large institutions who have received Meaningful Use incentive money. Our goal is 100 users in June and July, though we will increase this goal if our initial experiments are successful and easily scaled. We will also experiment with recruiting participants using AdWords and other search-based marketing, as the intent of making a search suggests activation. 
2. A landing page that explains the importance of this problem, the project, the risks to the patient/family member, and collects a name and basic contact information to aid in follow up. 
3. A webform that serves as a customizable medical records request form. We are working with premier health privacy lawyers to develop a simple form that is undeniably a legal records request. We will first experiment with requesting medical records that are time and content bounded and low in controversy, including the patient's most recent active medication list, an allergy list, and immunization history. We wish to encourage access to patient data in a digital format, but are struggling with a consistent way to request this without engaging in negotiations with medical records departments, and are open to suggestions. Over the next few weeks we will experiment with requesting the records be returned by directing us to instructions for accessing our records digitally such as through a patient portal, or if that is not available by email. If that is determined to be too complicated for the MVP we will request the records both by fax and by mail. 
4. A simple lookup system for the fax number of medical records at major medical institutions by improving upon existing NPPES data. 
5. Electronic faxing integration to send this webform to medical records at the patient's healthcare organization, track whether it was received, and receive any faxed responses to our request. 
6. Two-pronged approach to follow-up on the result of the request: a. by automated text and email survey b. by requesting medical records fax us a confirmation when the records are sent to the patient OR by requesting the record itself be sent to us. We would use this only to have the best possible insight into how the request was responded to, and would delete the medical records when they are received.  

While out of scope for the MVP, we are interested in developing a public dashboard for patient data access in the spirit of the [US City Open Data Census] (http://us-city.census.okfn.org/) and a more automated way of populating patient reports to the Office of Civil Liberties. 




